Rationale
=========

I am trying to make a computer program which is a demonstration of using a computer to simulate 3D physics and graphics. This will take the format of a realtime demonstration of around 2 minutes in length, similar to a video but where each frame is calculated from scratch by my program. I want to make something where the process of creation is a technically challenging experience for me, but the outcome is presented as a visual demonstration which can be appreciated and enjoyed by everyone.

Through this Extended Project I will get the chance to explore and experiment with two fields of computer science (computational graphics and physics) that I have not previously had any experience in. Additionally, I will get to put to use some of the tools that I have learnt about in the A2 mathematics course, such as vectors and matrices. I will also learn about the artistic side of making a 3D animation visually appealing.

I do a lot of programming in my free time, so I think that this is a good way to see how far I can stretch my programming ability. I did not choose Computing as one of my A-level subjects, however I would like to go on and study Computer Science at university. This project will allow me to continue to practice my programming skills, making up for the fact that I do not get to do so in any of my other subjects. Although this project supports my interests and career choice, the skill set required to successfully complete this is not directly related to these -- it has closest ties with the video game industry, which I am not interested in. Because of this the project will be good for broadening my horizons.

There is plenty of information related to the project that I have chosen, and my primary source of information will be the internet. The "demoscene" comprises of programmers who demonstrate their ability through visual demos similar to the one that I am attempting, but on a larger scale. Information on the techniques used is scattered across the internet. Some of the techniques that are used in such demos are presented at conferences, and I will make use of videos and slides from talks that are relevant. I will also be looking for books on this topic if I cannot find the information I need on the internet.
