February end-of-month review
===

(written 4 March)

I had intended to do a lot of work during February, in order to achieve the
important technological milestones that I had set myself in my Timeline.
Originally I had intended for the completion of (or failure to complete) the
milestones to give me an indication of whether the original idea was
technically feasible in the limited time that I have to finish my Project.
However, the frightening lack of progress during this month has meant that not
only do I still not have a working prototype of the basics of my project, but
also that I still do not know whether my project is too ambitious and whether
it needs to be cut down.

Reflecting on this month has proven very valuable in recognising flaws in my
project scheduling and management abilities. I have learnt that if I am left
unchecked, I will experience a cycle of intense periods of dedication and
fascination towards a project followed by long periods of time when I become
more interested or occupied by other things.

As it stands this is very bad for my project, as it means that I cannot do the
sustained work necessary for its completion. However, on the positive side
dedicating a contiguous block of time to the project helps reduce the friction
that is experienced when picking a project up again after a while of not having
touched it.

I can compromise, turning this tendency into a positive trait, by reducing the
time period of this cycle from months to a week. Under this scheme I would, for
example, dedicate two or three contiguous days of my week to working on my EP,
and the rest of the time I could focus on other things.

In order for this to be successful,  I need to start explicitly planning and
dedicating chunks of time towards doing my Extended Project on a weekly basis,
on top of my existing process of setting myself targets to be achieved by
certain monthly deadlines.

It is not true to say that absolutely no progress was done this month. I have
found some sources that I expect will be useful in helping me to make the wave
simulation. One of these sources is in code format, which is very helpful as I
can see the process step-by-step. I have started to code the wave simulation
code based on this, however I have not been able to get any visual feedback as
to how well it works yet.

Overall, I have failed to achieve the goals set for this month, although I have
made some modest headway with them. A lot of burden is placed on next month, as
not only do I have to clear the backlog of work to be done, but it is also the
last free month I get before I become bogged down with revision and exams in
April through to the beginning of June. However, I am optimistic that with
careful scheduling and management, I will be back on track again come the exam
period.


Overview of this month's progress on the timeline:

**End of February**:

  *Targets*:
  * Make a working demo of the mesh renderer. (done)
  * Start a prototype of fluid simulation (not done)

<!-- vim: set tw=79: -->
